mRNA/Workflow_simplified.md, before:

Differential microRNA expression
--------------------------------------

#### Analysis workflow

Reads were mapped to the GRC37 reference sequence with `tophap2`. Duplicates
and non-unique reads were removed using `samtools`. Counts per gene were
assigned using `htseq-count`. Differential expression analysis was performed
with `DESeq2`.


#### Quality control

Eight mRNA samples were sequenced on HiSeq4000 using paired-edn sequencing
protocol (2x75bp). Data quality looks good, more than 10 mln reads mapped to
known genes for each samples, average duplication rate 25%.


| sequencing id    | sample name | sequenced reads | mapped reads | nodup reads | uniq reads | reads mapped to genes | % reads mapped to genes of nodup |
| ---------------- | ----------------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---- |
| WTCHG_260126_201 | miR-cont1 (Kim)    | 33,118,323 | 28,940,226 | 22,861,259 | 20,903,213 | 18,655,111 | 81.6 |
| WTCHG_260126_202 | miR-cont2 (Jeon)   | 40,382,477 | 35,098,464 | 26,064,426 | 23,685,281 | 22,279,843 | 85.5 |
| WTCHG_260126_203 | miR-cont3 (Paul)   | 36,883,161 | 31,867,272 | 23,090,486 | 20,716,797 | 20,086,531 | 87   |
| WTCHG_260126_204 | miR-cont4 (L-cone) | 32,600,347 | 28,311,673 | 21,460,462 | 19,431,429 | 18,548,390 | 86.4 |
| WTCHG_260126_205 | miR-10b1 (Kim)     | 35,065,691 | 30,709,386 | 24,134,327 | 22,100,297 | 19,870,114 | 82.3 |
| WTCHG_260126_206 | miR-10b2 (Jeon)    | 37,596,944 | 32,653,080 | 24,289,556 | 22,019,957 | 20,762,385 | 85.5 |
| WTCHG_260126_207 | miR-10b3 (Paul)    | 38,668,642 | 33,371,257 | 23,685,806 | 21,237,491 | 20,725,176 | 87.5 |
| WTCHG_260126_208 | miR-10b4 (L-cone)  | 37,182,862 | 32,017,247 | 23,593,110 | 21,280,150 | 20,862,969 | 88.4 |


#### Differential expression analysis

Unfortunately differential gene expression analysis did not discover any
significant hits. All genes had p-values between 0.01 and 0.99 and adjusted
p-values of 0.99. When we looked at the correlation between each gene
expression under two conditions (miR-cont and miR-10b), we saw that there was
indeed almots now difference in gene expression (Pearson correlation
coefficient 0.9995 with p-value < 2.2e-16).

![alt text](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/gene_expression_correlation.png)

When we look at the fold change, we can see that the vast majority of genes
have a fold change around 1; a handful of genes which has higher/lower fold
change are extremely lowly expressed genes (which, therefore, also were not
significantly different).

![alt text](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/fold_change.png)


Differential expression analysis results can be found
[here](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/miR-10b.miR-cont.DE_results.txt).
Normalized gene expression can be found
[here](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/miR-10b.miR-cont.normalized_counts.txt).

Nevertheless, here are all genes which did not pass multiple testing correction
but have non-corrected p-value < 0.05.

| Gene id | Gene name | miR-10b expression | miR-cont expression | log2 fold change | P value |  
| ------------------ | ------------- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| ENSG00000083454.17 | P2RX5         | 1443  | 1707  | -0.14 | 0.033 |
| ENSG00000112715.16 | VEGFA         | 658   | 1167  | -0.09 | 0.033 |
| ENSG00000119725.13 | ZNF410        | 43    | 81    | -0.08 | 0.043 |
| ENSG00000126934.9  | MAP2K2        | 4097  | 4544  | -0.12 | 0.042 |
| ENSG00000151414.10 | NEK7          | 14104 | 15488 | -0.11 | 0.036 |
| ENSG00000155729.8  | KCTD18        | 2257  | 2624  | -0.16 | 0.01  |
| ENSG00000161642.13 | ZNF385A       | 81  7 | 153   | -0.09 | 0.025 |
| ENSG00000162368.9  | CMPK1         | 18393 | 22446 | -0.16 | 0.016 |
| ENSG00000165891.11 | E2F7          | 1655  | 2057  | -0.16 | 0.023 |
| ENSG00000169955.6  | ZNF747        | 1032  | 1224  | -0.14 | 0.038 |
| ENSG00000181038.9  | METTL23       | 1364  | 1588  | -0.13 | 0.044 |
| ENSG00000185133.9  | INPP5J        | 11    | 0     |  0.03 | 0.043 |
| ENSG00000187045.12 | TMPRSS6       | 90    | 192   | -0.08 | 0.028 |
| ENSG00000188993.3  | LRRC66        | 13    | 35    | -0.06 | 0.038 |
| ENSG00000196312.7  | HIATL2        | 164   | 226 7 | -0.12 | 0.043 |
| ENSG00000211666.2  | IGLV2-14      | 20    | 0.9   |  0.04 | 0.025 |
| ENSG00000211943.2  | IGHV3-15      | 0     | 10    | -0.03 | 0.04  |
| ENSG00000225193.5  | RPS12P26      | 12    | 0     |  0.03 | 0.035 |
| ENSG00000233833.1  | ETF1P3        | 238   | 170   |  0.12 | 0.038 |
| ENSG00000259469.1  | RP11-227D13.4 | 7     | 26    | -0.05 | 0.047 |



#### Designed by Irina Pulyakhina irina@well.ox.ac.uk

Commit message:

added expression boxplots in IL17A, IL22, MAP3K7, IFNG

mRNA/Workflow_simplified.md, after:

Differential microRNA expression
--------------------------------------

#### Analysis workflow

Reads were mapped to the GRC37 reference sequence with `tophap2`. Duplicates
and non-unique reads were removed using `samtools`. Counts per gene were
assigned using `htseq-count`. Differential expression analysis was performed
with `DESeq2`.


#### Quality control

Eight mRNA samples were sequenced on HiSeq4000 using paired-edn sequencing
protocol (2x75bp). Data quality looks good, more than 10 mln reads mapped to
known genes for each samples, average duplication rate 25%.


| sequencing id    | sample name | sequenced reads | mapped reads | nodup reads | uniq reads | reads mapped to genes | % reads mapped to genes of nodup |
| ---------------- | ----------------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---- |
| WTCHG_260126_201 | miR-cont1 (Kim)    | 33,118,323 | 28,940,226 | 22,861,259 | 20,903,213 | 18,655,111 | 81.6 |
| WTCHG_260126_202 | miR-cont2 (Jeon)   | 40,382,477 | 35,098,464 | 26,064,426 | 23,685,281 | 22,279,843 | 85.5 |
| WTCHG_260126_203 | miR-cont3 (Paul)   | 36,883,161 | 31,867,272 | 23,090,486 | 20,716,797 | 20,086,531 | 87   |
| WTCHG_260126_204 | miR-cont4 (L-cone) | 32,600,347 | 28,311,673 | 21,460,462 | 19,431,429 | 18,548,390 | 86.4 |
| WTCHG_260126_205 | miR-10b1 (Kim)     | 35,065,691 | 30,709,386 | 24,134,327 | 22,100,297 | 19,870,114 | 82.3 |
| WTCHG_260126_206 | miR-10b2 (Jeon)    | 37,596,944 | 32,653,080 | 24,289,556 | 22,019,957 | 20,762,385 | 85.5 |
| WTCHG_260126_207 | miR-10b3 (Paul)    | 38,668,642 | 33,371,257 | 23,685,806 | 21,237,491 | 20,725,176 | 87.5 |
| WTCHG_260126_208 | miR-10b4 (L-cone)  | 37,182,862 | 32,017,247 | 23,593,110 | 21,280,150 | 20,862,969 | 88.4 |


#### Differential expression analysis

Unfortunately differential gene expression analysis did not discover any
significant hits. All genes had p-values between 0.01 and 0.99 and adjusted
p-values of 0.99. When we looked at the correlation between each gene
expression under two conditions (miR-cont and miR-10b), we saw that there was
indeed almots now difference in gene expression (Pearson correlation
coefficient 0.9995 with p-value < 2.2e-16).

![alt text](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/gene_expression_correlation.png)

When we look at the fold change, we can see that the vast majority of genes
have a fold change around 1; a handful of genes which has higher/lower fold
change are extremely lowly expressed genes (which, therefore, also were not
significantly different).

![alt text](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/fold_change.png)


Differential expression analysis results can be found
[here](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/miR-10b.miR-cont.DE_results.txt).
Normalized gene expression can be found
[here](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/miR-10b.miR-cont.normalized_counts.txt).

Nevertheless, here are all genes which did not pass multiple testing correction
but have non-corrected p-value < 0.05.

| Gene id | Gene name | miR-10b expression | miR-cont expression | log2 fold change | P value |  
| ------------------ | ------------- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| ENSG00000083454.17 | P2RX5         | 1443  | 1707  | -0.14 | 0.033 |
| ENSG00000112715.16 | VEGFA         | 658   | 1167  | -0.09 | 0.033 |
| ENSG00000119725.13 | ZNF410        | 43    | 81    | -0.08 | 0.043 |
| ENSG00000126934.9  | MAP2K2        | 4097  | 4544  | -0.12 | 0.042 |
| ENSG00000151414.10 | NEK7          | 14104 | 15488 | -0.11 | 0.036 |
| ENSG00000155729.8  | KCTD18        | 2257  | 2624  | -0.16 | 0.01  |
| ENSG00000161642.13 | ZNF385A       | 81  7 | 153   | -0.09 | 0.025 |
| ENSG00000162368.9  | CMPK1         | 18393 | 22446 | -0.16 | 0.016 |
| ENSG00000165891.11 | E2F7          | 1655  | 2057  | -0.16 | 0.023 |
| ENSG00000169955.6  | ZNF747        | 1032  | 1224  | -0.14 | 0.038 |
| ENSG00000181038.9  | METTL23       | 1364  | 1588  | -0.13 | 0.044 |
| ENSG00000185133.9  | INPP5J        | 11    | 0     |  0.03 | 0.043 |
| ENSG00000187045.12 | TMPRSS6       | 90    | 192   | -0.08 | 0.028 |
| ENSG00000188993.3  | LRRC66        | 13    | 35    | -0.06 | 0.038 |
| ENSG00000196312.7  | HIATL2        | 164   | 226 7 | -0.12 | 0.043 |
| ENSG00000211666.2  | IGLV2-14      | 20    | 0.9   |  0.04 | 0.025 |
| ENSG00000211943.2  | IGHV3-15      | 0     | 10    | -0.03 | 0.04  |
| ENSG00000225193.5  | RPS12P26      | 12    | 0     |  0.03 | 0.035 |
| ENSG00000233833.1  | ETF1P3        | 238   | 170   |  0.12 | 0.038 |
| ENSG00000259469.1  | RP11-227D13.4 | 7     | 26    | -0.05 | 0.047 |


#### Gene expression in selected genes of interest

![alt text](https://github.com/jknightlab/mirna_pipeline/blob/master/mRNA/control_genes.png)


#### Designed by Irina Pulyakhina irina@well.ox.ac.uk
